>> Brian Holt: Let's talk about Advanced
React, these were things that you don't
really need to use these so much,
maybe uncontrolled forms you,
you'll use these quite a bit,
but error boundaries and portals.
Much more niche in their use cases, but
still felt useful enough that I wanted you
to have them in your tool bag even if you
don't pull them out very much, right?
So let's talk about portals, this is
just the markup for the page, right?
We have root right here, and that's the
only thing that our app can render into,
let's say we had ten different divs here,
our app currently is only constrained to
its root, which is this root right here.
Let's say that you dislike your users and
you want to show them modals,
I think modals are a terrible thing,
I think whoever invented them
should be ashamed of themselves.
And now I'm going to show
you how to do them [LAUGH],
this used to be a huge problem
trying to render modals with React,
because it's really hard to get
something in front of other stuff.
You either have to do unholy
things with Z-Index, or
you have to find some way to render
something first in your app,
and it becomes really hard to do, right?
We could probably mess around and
figure out how to do it
somewhat with context, right?
But I'm gonna show you something way
easier that they introduced to make
this a much easier thing,
a much more common, I'll say more common,
but less user antagonistic.
Way of using portals is, let's say you
had a side nav that contextually rendered
stuff based on what was on the page,
and so they're two separate things.
You can use a portal to say like, all
right, render this into the side nav if
you're on this page, right, that's
actually a very cool use case for this.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah,
a good example of this,
if you just wanna visualize what I'm
talking about is the Azure Docs, so
JavaScript Azure Functions, let's just see
if I can show you what I'm talking about.
So let's say on this page,
you have the nav here, and
then this is your React
app here in the middle,
you have these like additional
resources here that you're training.
And like these change depend on what page
you're on, you could use a portal to, say,
render into the additional resources
these things when you're on this page,
it allows you to render
outside of your app, right?
So that's kind of the use case
we're getting at here, so
we're gonna head into our index.html, and
above root, we're going to put a modal.
>> Brian Holt: This time we're not gonna
put anything inside of modal because we
don't want it to show anything unless
there's something rendered into it, right?
Okay, I want you to make a new file here,
I just call it modal.jsx,
you ever watch the good
place that TV show.
I feel like when I get
up to the pearly gates,
one of my crimes against humanity is
showing so many people how to make modals.
>> Brian Holt: All right, import,
use effect, and use ref, so
we'll talk about ref as well,
that'll be kind of exciting from React.
>> Brian Holt: Import create portal
>> Brian Holt: From react-dom,
I'm just gonna say this
code is 90% directly from
the React docs, so you credit work is due.
>> Brian Holt: So maybe I can pass
my sins on to them, modal equals,
we're talking about children as well,
there's lots of fun tidbits in here about
React of some more advanced use cases.
>> Brian Holt: All right, so
this is kind of a weird one but
what we have one div that
represents the root of our portal,
which is gonna be that modal
that we're gonna grab, right?
We need to reference the same
div between renders, right,
because this modal is gonna keep
rendering cuz it's React, right?
That's how React works, so how do we
make sure that we're always referring to
the exact same div, we don't wanna
create a new div every single render,
we wanna refer to the same div
between renders, how do we do that?
We don't want to do
a document.getElementID directly in
the render, that's a slow API, right,
anytime that you have to interact with
a div direct or the DOM directly,
you end up in this kind of slow
code path and you don't want that.
Enter refs, that's what we're gonna do
here, so we're gonna say const elRef,
el being element, use ref and
we're gonna have it start as null.
This is the default value the first time,
and then we're gonna say if no
elRef.current, then elRef.current
=document.createElement div.
So, a ref is a frozen object,
we don't really use freeze too much,
it's usually a library thing, but
it only has one thing that you
can modify on it, which is current,
why is it this way?
Because the ref is an object, we can
modify the values on it, and it's always
going to refer to the same thing, right,
it's the pointer points at the same thing.
>> Brian Holt: So this current
is going to be the same div, so
we're only gonna create one div, and we're
going to reference the same div every
single render, little strange, I know.
But stick with me, and it'll make maybe
a bit more sense here, just keep in mind,
this elRef contains a div, and it's the
same div no matter how many times I run
the render, now,
our old friend, useEffect.
>> Brian Holt: Const modal root
= document.getElementById,
modal, so that's gonna be our modal root,
modal root.appendChild, elRef.current,
so now, our created div is inserted
into the DOM, that's cool.
And hold on, we'll come back and
do the return here in a second cuz I wanna
explain that more in depth, how many
times are we gonna insert our div?
Once, empty array, right, you got it, and
then down here at the bottom we're
going to return create portal of div.
>> Brian Holt: And
we're going to render out children.
>> Brian Holt: And then we're going
to do that with our elRef.current.
>> Brian Holt: And then export
default modal, so create portal,
what's cool about this is, now, we can
render this anywhere inside of our app and
it'll be like, you don't want
this actually directly here,
you're trying to stick this over there,
right?
So it's not gonna render whatever
you render as children there,
it's going to stick it whatever you put in
the portal, let's talk about children for
just a second.
So if I have a div here and
I have my h1 that's like right there,
right, what is the children of this div,
it's whatever is inside of it, right?
So it's the same thing with modal,
what is the children of modal,
it's whatever's inside of it, right?
Whatever you put inside of it,
most of the stuff that we've been doing
has been self closing, right,
where it's pizza, because it doesn't make
any we're not trying to put
anything inside of pizza, right?
So that's why all these have been
the self closing, but modal,
we actually do wanna have arbitrary stuff
inside of it, so that's what children is,
and children comes in via props.
It's a specifically named props,
we destructured here, but
this is normally called props, right,
if you did it that way,
you would just say props.children, right?
But instead we did destructuring
cuz I don't know, but
I typically destructure cuz I like
the shorter names, but that's up to you.
Cool, we used an effect here because
we want this to happen once,
we want it to be scheduled for after the
initial render, that makes sense, okay.
That's probably a hint of what I'm about
to talk to, this has a memory leak.
>> Brian Holt: Why?
>> Brian Holt: Let's say I render and
unrender this modal a thousand times.
>> Brian Holt: How many divs is modal
root gonna have inside of it, 1,000?
Nothing goes back and removes
elRref.current from this modal root,
so it's just gonna keep
leaving behind divs, right,
so we have to go clean up after ourselves,
right?
So this is one of the weirdest APIs for
React in my opinion, but
you return a function here,
and you do all your cleanup here,
so modalroot.removechild.
>> Brian Holt: elRef.current,
that's our cleanup function, so
whatever function you run or
you return from your effect will be run
once after it gets unmounted, and
this will solve our memory leak.